Anyway, I think we ought to continue talking about
your early childhood a little bit more. I really
do. Again, the things that... Well, you have that
and about the Jew peddler coming through. I have
those things, yes. We've gotten a lot of the
isolated things, and I want to run things together
now. Yeah. Because now's really the time. I'm
going to transcribe verbatim from every take and
then cut and paste and put it together. Yeah,
you've got that. I've got that story. And you've
got the one about carrying the mail across the
river horseback. Got one about the old horse, us
feeding her and killing her. Right. Now, which one
was that? Oh, Cousy. Feeding her and killing her? I
don't think we have that. Yeah. Yes, you do, too.
I've got that one. We fed her oats in a tub full of
oats. And me and the little Mexican boy, Jesus,
carried the oats in gallon buckets and filled a tub
full up and was going to fatten her overnight. And
we did. She swelled up as big as two horses. I bet she
did. Yes, she did. And I know you have that one. OK.
And I just don't really know. Well, I'm just
thinking, you know, like today you were talking
about the values that you feel are missing. And I
guess you feel they're existent in the Texas Hill
Country. Well, they are more so than in a lot of
other places in this country. They are, as far as
old talks is concerned. I think that's important
to say. I mean, you know, you came from a grassroots
family. When you got here, there wasn't much grass
yet. No, I didn't. I mean, you really...
You scrapped a living on a frontier. As you taught
those kids to read today, you told them what a
frontier was. And... You've never known really
any other life as far as your childhood goes.
That's so right. I've got the stories of Uncle
Jesse and things like that. And you've got the
story of Uncle Jesse and Donald's got a wooden leg.
Yeah. Donald's got a meat skin. Laid away degrees
that mother laid twice a day. And he'd stomp that
wooden leg at me, and man, I'd just cut a beeline out
to my mama. It'd just scare me to death. You know, it
was taken off along about here, and it fastened on.
No, I guess it didn't, because he could bend his
knees. It was all the way under his knee, and it had
to come down here. It had to a fork like that, and
they come together. And it was just a wooden, he
didn't have wooden foot, it was just a wooden
stick. And he'd stomp that thing at me, and man, I
would run. Oh, I bet. And I know you've got my poem,
the first one he ever taught me. I think I do. I've
got a secret, just be free, Robin and I in the sweet
chubby tweed. But Wobby knows it best. I believe
you've got that one. I do have that one. All right.
And then the next one that he taught me, and it's a
long one. The buttercups are coming in the scarlet
columbine, and in the sunny meadows the
dandelions shine. Just as many days as your salt
cans can hold, the Lord God made them all. The
little bird flew over and oh how sweet they sang to
tell the happy children that once again this
spring the graving grass comes creeping so soft
beneath the feet. The frogs began to ripple, a
music tearing sweet. Now I learned that before I
started school from Uncle Jesse. What are
children missing today? poetry they're missing
the love of poetry and uncle jesse taught me all of
that and where did uncle jesse learn this i mean he
was a veteran of the civil war uncle jesse uh
Johnson had a good education, and he got it from
McGuffey's Readers. McGuffey's Readers. That's
right. And he'd get those things out. Every story
in McGuffey's Reader had a moral to it. It had a
principle, and it taught you something. And he'd
sit me down, and he'd say, now you listen. All
right, you saw today with these children that I had
in this room, and the last one that came, they do not
understand what the word listen means. And I had to
repeat to that little girl three times. I said,
well, honey, how many boxes do you see on that
shelf? One. Well, what did I tell you? Get the
cookie out of the box. I said, well, where is the
box? Mm-hmm. Well, it's here. I said, now do you
know what to do? Yeah. She said, get the cookie. I
said, yes. They never listen. They do not
understand that there is one thing to do but have
their eyes glued on that idiot boxer called TV.
That's right. And there's no morals being taught
on television these days. But there's anything
but morals on television. Exactly right. I think
that's right. They were missing the boat. Well,
when you grew up, you had literature in your home,
as you said. You also had a mother that wrote songs.
Yes, she did. She had beautiful songs. And I hope
that we can take some of those and put them into
print. I hope someday that somebody will pick them
up. Well, I know somebody that will pick them up and
do an album with them if you're interested. If they
were interested. Worth it. They're worth it. I
would love to see them maybe before we go, if we can
find them or something like that. And the thing
that most children are missing today is that
companionship of older people. Now, I didn't miss
out on a thing in the world for companionship of
elderly people because I was the oldest
granddaughter in the Johnson family. in the
Bunton family, in the Chapman family, and in the
Cox. See, my grandmother, Chapman, was a Cox
before, but no relation to the Cox I married. And
the oldest in the Cox family. Well, I had all the
attention that
could be given a little girl. But for the same
token, I had an inferiority complex that wouldn't
quit. very bad why was that um first that's
cross-eyed second you know they just didn't
wasn't anything or they didn't think could ever be
done about it i was about as broad as i was long and i
my hair wasn't Well, it had a wave in it, but my
mother plaited it so tight that I couldn't bat my
eyes. And those cross eyes sitting towards
Joneses. And me as fat as a little pig. And long
dresses. I can see those things, and they just make
me so mad because they come to my sheet tops.
Really? But I had to wear them. Yeah. And I had big
bows in my hair, and I always had a sash, and I hated
those sashes. We're talking about, because you
were born in 1905,
right? And so here in Texas in 1905, you were
wearing your long dresses, you were wearing your
pigtails, and you were living without the... The
fancy city life that everybody else in the country
was trying to aspire to have. That's right. I can
remember just as well as it is yesterday when I had
my first pair of patent leather slippers. Yeah. I
was seven years old, and I just thought I was
uptown. Right. And I was. Sure. And they were
called Mary Janes. Really? Put out by Buster
Brown. Oh, yes. Good old Buster Brown. Buster
Brown shoes. And then the next pair of pretty shoes
that I had, I bought from a Jew store here in Johnson
City, and his name was Max Mellinger. Max
Mellinger. Uh-huh. And they were really pretty.
Uh-huh. They were black patent leather, and they
had red kid's skin tops laced up. Oh, my, were they
ever pretty. And I had, well, we called it a
bearskin coat, but it wasn't. It was an imitation
fur, and it was red. Uh-huh. And by then, I'd had my
eyes straightened. Uh-huh. And I'd kind of
trimmed up. And that was seven, about seven? I
guess I must have been, oh, I had my eyes
straightened when I was 10. So I was about 10 years
old. And I had slammed down to where I was at least I
could get through the door. And at school, they'd
call me Donna because that's fat and all that kind
of stuff. But anyway, I was so proud of that little
red-skinned, Bare skin coat. Oh, I was so proud.
Well, we'd had one once before, but it was a
chinchilla effect that we'd bought from a peddler
and it came through. But this one was bought from
Max Mellinger here. And it's right where, his
store is right where the old theater is now. Oh.
That's right. And it was really a nice store. And he
had nice goods. And he was well thought of in the
community and... Was your grandfather, was he
here after your grandfather or before? After my
grandfather came here. Oh, okay. They were good
friends. They were. I thought they might be. Yeah,
they were. That is natural. Yes, I know. I'll tell
you, you can't, you might separate them, but you
can't, you might separate them in distance. But
not, they'll find each other. They do. I know. Not
only in that way, but financially in every other
way, if it's needed. Right, that's true. If it's
needed, that's part of their living, that's part
of their life, that's part of their bringing up.
Tradition, right. You bet it is. You said you
didn't find out that your grandfather was Jewish
until you were a grown woman. A grown woman, right,
okay. And you didn't really know what that was
about at all, did you? No, I didn't even know. But I
knew why, that he would tell me about this
compulsory military training. In Europe, right,
in Germany? In Germany, and why he didn't want it.
And he also told me when I was a girl, well, it was
before World War I, He said, the one we had better be
watching out for is Japan. He'd never say Japan.
He'd always say Japan. He says, they're going to
sneak around. They're sneakers. They're going to
get you. And they're going to find us asleep. And
they're going to hurt us. And he saw a war pending?
Yes, he did. And he kept telling us that. While I was
in high school, And I thought, well, Grandpa just
has the awfulest feeling. I wonder why. And he came
back and he said, I'll tell you something else. He
said, well, my daddy was called up for World War I.
But peace was signed before he had to go. But
anyway, he was called up into the service. And so
was Kitty Clyde's father, all of them. And my
grandfather told them, he says, you may whip the
Germans down, but they'll come back. You may think
you've got them whipped, but they'll come back.
And when they do, they will be against you. You're
going to feed them, you're going to clothe them,
and you're going to help them everywhere in the
world to establish their government. And they're
going to turn on you, and when they do, It's going to
hurt you. Really? So it's sort of a folk wisdom of
world politics that you grew up with. That I
actually grew up with and had no newspapers, no
nothing. My grandfather was a well-read man and a
man of few words in public. My grandmother talked
for the family. But my grandfather had very little
to say. And where did his grandmother, I know
that's his second wife, because his first wife
died? No, his mother died. It was his mother that
died. Mother that died, yeah. And he took this, he
was a twin. And he and his twin sister, and her name
was Clyde. That's where my mother got the name of
Kitty Clyde. And he took this, well, yeah. They
landed at Indiola and came on over to Houston. And
my grandfather came from Houston to Brenham. And
there was a German settlement that stopped in
there, a bunch of the German immigrants that
stopped in there. And my grandfather got a job
working on the first railroad dump that was built
from Brenham to Houston. Really? Now that, to me,
is something. I look back and I say, yes. You know, I
told you the night before last, I said, you can't
find half a dozen Jews in the world that were
pioneers, that would brave the wilderness first.
They waited until it was settled, and then they
came. My grandfather braved the wilderness. He
did. Yeah, he did. He definitely did. Yeah. And
then came... Well, anyway,
grandmother died, and Aunt Beth and Uncle Alex was
younger than Clyde and Jim. Jim was grandfather.
James Henry was his name. Mm-hmm. they were
younger than James and Henry and Clyde. But they
made a home for these children. And grandfather
married again. Your great-grandfather. My
great-grandfather married again. But he changed
his name from Chapman, S-H, or? S-H-A-P-M-A-W-N,
C-H-A-P-M-A-N. Chapman. Chapman. He changed
Chapman to Chapman. So he changed it. And he was
afraid that he'd be tracked down, sent back, and
put to work. Because he was so tall and so big for his
age. And he was a grown man at 13. And naturally, he
was scared to death. He was running scared. But
then they moved to Round Rock. The entire family.
Yeah. Moved over to Round Rock. And then
grandfather met
grandmother. This was in the 1800s. Yes. About
1854. Well, grandfather came here before then.
Let's see. Grandmother and grandfather. Let's
see. 1854. Grandfather came here about 18 and got
here in time for the Civil War. He was in the Civil
War. I could look it up and I believe it must have
been about 1850 because he got here in time to go to
the Civil War and he fought in the Civil War.
Grandfather Chapman fought in the Civil War. Yes,
he sure did. Then he married Grandmother The same
year that
Grandpa Johnson married Grandma Bunton. Oh,
really? That's like 1878. And then, I believe
that's Kitty Clyde coming now. Oh, all right.
Looks like somebody. Damn, I have no time. Excuse
me. Uh-huh. But that's who it is. Okay. 1878?
Mm-hmm. They married. Chapman. Chapman. And
Uncle Buddy was born in 1880. That's right.
Mm-hmm. Okay. And Aunt Mabel was born in 1882, and
my mother was born in 1885. Okay. Right down that
line. Sure. I'll have to see what she says. For
sure. Well, I'll cut this off for a second. When
he was president of the Republic of Texas, and he
was offered the gift of the teletype
to Texas. And for two years, Houston didn't
answer. Houston didn't recognize it. So he sits
down and he writes him a letter, and he says, I take
that you don't care for my offer, and so I am
withdrawing it. Well, had he taken that offer
today, we would not be burdened with taxes, but we
would be living off of the revenue that that... Of
the telegraph. Of the telegraph that would be...
brought in to Texas. They wanted to try it here? Is
that what it was? They wanted to set up a system? To
give it to Texas alone, the man alone, willed it to
Texas. As a republic? Yes. Isn't that something?
That is very true. That's amazing. That's another
thing about you I've got to say. Because of when you
were born and because of who your relatives were,
whereas we talk about seeing so-and-so here or
meeting this dignitary there, Your life, the way
of your life, was what history was at that time and
who these people were. And there just were not that
many people in Texas as you realized when your
grandparents were here that everybody was
involved. That's right. In the building of this
day. That's very true. And it's firsthand. It's
firsthand. And right there, oh. Grandpa Baines
borrowed money from Sam Houston. Uh-huh. And the
letter is down there in the library. Uh-huh.
Stating, thank you for loaning me the $150 that I am
returning. Uh-huh. When you say there was a close
bill of relation, there was. Yes. Well, all right.
When I was a little girl... down here on the ranch,
and we were driving. We sold our steers to Tom
Stribling. And we had to take them to Marble Falls.
That was the closest railroad. Well, you don't
cross steers over a Colorado River. Now, that's
for sure. Not then. All right. And we took them on
over to Fairland to put them in on the train to take
them across. We came back. And we stayed all night
at Grandma Stribling's house over here at Round
Mountain. Now that's horseback riding. That's
not trailer horse business like these trail rides
they have today. But that was sitting in the saddle
all day long and come back that far. And we went
to... And that's driving how many head of cattle?
Well, altogether, we had 200 and I believe it was
275. Well, we're supposed to have had 290, but we
lost that many in the... cedar brakes from here
there now that's no joke oh sure and so that's then
when we got them on then we had to come back well we
went through these pastures and that's the reason
every one of us had to know every earmark and cattle
brand in this country and it was just as automatic
as Yes, it was a way of life. And we knew what that was
branded. We knew what the earmark was. And we knew
whether it belonged in our herd or not. Like
license plates from different states.
Absolutely. It's exactly like license plates
from different states. But you knew it. Yeah. And
you would know whether it belonged in your herd or
not. Right. So we brought these. Well, we didn't
get them all. I'll never forget that. Tom liked
that a fit. But we didn't get them all. We didn't get
but 15. Where the other four got to, I... I don't
know, but we brought back 15 and they went in the
next shipment. But grandma, scribbling that
night, told us that we could sleep on the porch and
on our saddle blanket and use our saddle for a
pillow. I never will forget that. I'd never done
anything like that, but I did it. I learned. That
you could. Didn't smell very good, that saddle
blanket. But it was all right. I bet it didn't. But
before we went to bed, we asked her what she did when
she was a little girl. Because she was from East
Texas. She told us about going to Sunday school in a
surrey. And we knew what a Surrey was, because
Grandpa Johnson had one. And he'd take us to church
in it. She said, Sam Houston and I would ride to
Sunday School, Baptist Sunday School, in the same
Surrey every Sunday. So I knew who Sam Houston was
as a little girl. A little girl. I wasn't over 10
years old, but I knew the history of Sam Houston
from... Way back. From hearsay firsthand? Yeah,
hearsay firsthand. And she told us what kind of a
fellow he was. And she told us he didn't have much
money. And as I read on in history and I found out, by
the way, he didn't have enough to pay his
announcing fee. Yeah. That's right. So it was paid
for him. Well, that's no disgrace, but... There's
been lots of poor people who made it good in history
that came out wealthy, but
there's no disgrace in being poor. But there's a
disgrace in being ornery with it. That's
what makes you a disgraceful person, being ornery
by being poor and unclean. How poor you can be, you
can still be clean. You can still think good. You
can still have good principles. You can still be a
man or a woman and look the whole world in the face.
It's not where you live, it's how you live. It's how
you meet your fellow man. It's lots of times, it's
the kind word that you didn't say that day. Or it may
be... The handshake that you wish you had grabbed
and said, old boy, you did a good job. Or the pat on
the back for the little one that fell aside on the
race. You've run a good race, fella. You did your
best. You didn't do it. It's the smile that the
cripple might have needed who was sitting on the
side of the road. waiting just a hand. But you
didn't have time to stop and say, I'll help you.
Maybe it was an old woman at the crossing of the
street. Her feet were feeble. She's slow. Her
eyesight was bad. But you were in a hurry. You
didn't have time. Life meant nothing. But hurry,
hurry, hurry. But to her, it may have been her last
step had it been wrong. But you didn't have time.
All of those things add up at the setting of the sun.
It gives you a bit of heartache that you can never
overcome.
You just can't do it because that day is gone. It's
gone. You can't recall it. It may never come your
way again to have a chance to be kind.
I'd rather be... Do you think these values are the
values behind the people here in Johnson City? I
do. I believe it's stronger than anything. As I
have said a hundred times, and I'll say it again,
this is a hard land to make a living in. You have to
dig deeper. In other words, the worm is there, Mr.
Rooster, but you've got to scratch deeper. So with
people here, we know that we have to work harder to
produce whatever we have. And I have often said
that the oak tree in this country is typical of the
people who live here. Because you can look at it,
and it's bent from the snarls of the hard, cold
winters, the dry summers, the hard hails, the
winds, and the hardships that has hit it and bent it
in different forms and fashions. Yet, you look at
it, its roots are deep They're big, and they are
grown out and out, and the limbs spread out and out,
and they touch each way in the north, east, and
south. That's exactly the way the people are in
Blanco County, in Gillespie County. Their hands
are outstretched to one another, and they help you
when you need it. But you prove yourself first that
you're worthy of that help. You find no soup lines
here. You find no beggars on the street. They
believe in an honest day's work for an honest
dollar. And that's been our way of life. And our
children are missing that value. Our children
are, oh, I hope you don't have to work as hard as I
did. I don't believe in that stuff. I think they
should know that it doesn't hurt to pull a cotton
sack and have a bullnettle whip you on your little
bare legs and how they hurt and how hot it is. That's
true. and boll weevil stung cotton and you'll pick
them you'll go home and your blood will be dripping
off of the end of your fingers from where the burrs
have stuck it all day it wouldn't hurt these girls
or boys to have a taste of that it wouldn't hurt them
to have a taste of sitting in the saddle all day long
and having a well we called it dried beef they call
it jerky now but We'd take a hunk of dried beef and a
cold biscuit, ride all day long, and eat that cold
biscuit and jerky. Yes, you were tired when you got
home. Your little seat was wore out. But you still
had your night chores to do. You had a
responsibility to do. I've driven cattle for help
for my daddy. He'd say, well, I have three hands
today. All right. A dollar a day for my horse and
saddle. And thought I had good money. I was proud of
it. I could buy school clothes with it.
Life hasn't been easy, but I'm proud of it. I'm
proud. It has made me a stronger person. I can look
the whole...